hi there been a while well for me at
least I know for you maybe it was just
one click there's been many days since
I've done one of these in real life
we've had a midterm we've released a big
project but you know for you who knows
how time passes so for the next few
lectures we're gonna wrap up Java syntax
this will be it for Java stuff and then
after that we're gonna move on to data
structures and algorithms and that will
be the entirety of the rest of the
course so these next set of topics they
aren't super exciting I mean you might
find them fun but they're they're not
really big ideas so much as the way Java
does stuff so this is now where we're
entering the part of the class known as
advanced programming and most of the
work for the course now is going to be
focused on project 2 and so some of
these ideas that we're gonna present in
these lectures will be handy to you and
project 2 and you may see them in the
future now this is not gonna be a
comprehensive look at Java syntax
there's actually lots of other stuff out
there that we won't cover ever and
that's just because it's not a job of
class right we've got what we want after
this and we'll move on so in this
lecture we're gonna talk about auto
boxing promotion immutability and
generics and the next lectures we'll
talk about some more stuff so let's
start by talking about generics ok
so for the most part as you've seen in a
ray deck and linked list deck using
generics is pretty straightforward all
you need to do in order to use a generic
class is you need to provide an actual
type argument so if I have for example
an ArrayList that someone defined that
has some type parameter then we will
provide actual type arguments and here
I've noted I've put it both in the
declaration and in the instantiation
though of course we learned earlier kind
of Java 8 it's no longer necessary at
instantiation to do so as long as we're
declaring a variable at the same time
because Java will infer that now one
thing that we did not talk about was why
it is that when we want to create an
ArrayList of say integers I just
mentioned in an earlier video why it is
that we don't do lowercase n and so the
answer is simply that if you try and do
lowercase int you get a compile time
error so for example if I were to try
and compile this at the command line I
would get ArrayList int yeah you gotta
and I would the error would be required
reference found int does
like it and so what this is saying is it
expects a reference type any reference
type so what's a reference type it's
anything that's not a primitive type and
so this is a whole new hierarchy of
reference types that go with the
primitive types that we've come to know
and love and double those sorts of
things and so for each of those
primitive types there's a so called
wrapper type that represents the
reference version of the same idea and
so this right here we have byte short
integer long float and double and it
turns out that actually all of these
implement an interface known as number
you're not likely to interface with this
number class or interface directly so it
can't happen we also have boolean and
characters which are not numbers and but
all of them are objects of course and so
it's these reference types that we're
gonna be looking at and using so as
we've seen before we can say new
ArrayList integer and naively if we did
that then when we wanted to add if we
wanted to add a number to an ArrayList
we'd have to do something like elda add
new integer five Elda add new manager
sex because if this thing's expecting
integers I probably should be giving it
integers and likewise when I get back a
value from an ArrayList well when I say
L dot get zero it turns out that I want
to put it into an int variable and so to
get that value back I can use the value
of method that's part of the integer
class that I won't show quite yet okay
now doing something like this would be
super annoying if you had to manually
create an integer wrapper around each of
your numbers you wanted to put in an
ArrayList that wouldn't be so great and
likewise it seems annoying to have to
unwrap them and so at the same time they
released generics when they added it to
the language they also introduced this
neat feature which is auto boxing and
its counterpart auto unboxing so in Java
you will always get an implicit
conversion between the wrapper type that
goes to the primitive type and
vice-versa when needed and so for
example if I say if I say Elda add five
then the int even though is just a raw
primitive 32 bits that represent the
number five it will get wrapped up out
of
matically and so this code right here
works beautifully and you didn't even
have to know about this in order to use
arraylists however it is nice to know
that this exists because if you naively
proceed you can occasionally take some
significant performance sets so let's
get a sense of what's going on here
whenever you have code that expects a
wrapper type but you give it a primitive
it will automatically box up the number
so here for example is a method called
blah it accepts integers the wrapper
class and then prints them out however
if we call blah with a lower case int
then in that case it gets automatically
boxed up when this call happens it just
happens without you doing anything
likewise if we have a method that
expects a primitive and you instead give
it a reference type then or a wrapper
type around that primitive then it will
automatically unbox it for you okay now
a couple little tiny notes one is if you
have an array events if you cannot box
it into an array of integers and vice
versa if you actually need to make a
copy for some reason which can happen
sometimes then you actually need to make
a manual copy another is that the
process of auto boxing and unboxing
actually incurs a measurable performance
impact so the very fact that the
ArrayList class takes capital I integers
means if it performance won't be quite
as good as a version of ArrayList that
is hard to hardwired to handle the int
primitive type another big issue is that
wrapper types actually use much more
memory than primitive types and we'll
see just how much in a moment now I want
to mention that wrapper types are not
magic
they don't do anything that your classes
don't do for the most part and in fact
we can click right here oh it's me we
can click right here and we can see the
code for the integer class it's long has
lots of stuff in it I'm not gonna go
through this in detail although I won't
note that it has a private int privates
final and yes one of the things that has
is on line 840 it has an instance
variable which is called private final
int value and that you might imagine try
and guess what that is this is the value
that when you create an integer that you
wrap the thing that gets boxed up gets
put in this variable ultimately and so
you can see that happening right here in
the constructor we can also see for
example the
valueof method where is that value of
okay so what is value of do well it's
actually a little more complicated than
you might have guessed I won't go into
why that is okay now you've actually
used the integer class before in
particular you used the parse int method
and so the point here is simply to say
this integer class is a lot like the
ones that you've written in the past
this one happens to be 1600 lines long
and it does integer stuff only but
that's what it's all about and you can
actually see the authors of this class
including Josh blue who wrote some
really lovely books and I encourage you
if we actually end up going forward with
Java to check out his effective Java
which is quite good okay so the only
thing that's special about the integer
class capital i integer that is
different from what you can build in
java is auto boxing and unboxing you
cannot change the behavior of java in a
way that will allow you to do something
like boxing and auto boxing but other
than that single superpower of integer
it's just like any other class so the
last little thing I want to say about
wrapper types is the amount of memory
that they take up so let's assume just
to get a sense of why let's assume that
in Java all of our addresses are 64 bits
that all of our in are 32 bits and all
Java objects take 64 bits plus their
fields okay and let's imagine here we
have the method of bleep blorp which
takes no arguments creates an integer
and then prints it out so what I want
you to do is think about how much total
memory is used by this method to store
all of its local variables and I'll
reveal it in a moment
okay so these annotations I actually did
them live during the live version in
this lecture so they're already here and
they give you a substantial hint this
question isn't super interesting but you
know I just wanted you to give it
thought to it because I you know
wouldn't be watched on the talk for a
long time and something's not exciting
you kind of glaze over so this is my way
to trick you into actually engaging not
really a big puzzle so in this case the
total amount of memory that it takes is
well let's think about it
bleep blorp has a variable called X it
is in an integer so this box right here
is as annotated 64 bits it's an address
effectively or a reference to something
then here we have a object that was
created and that object has a single
field which is the one we just saw in
the source code that private final int
called value that's 32 bits we know
that's a 32 bit box and then we said
there's other information 64 bits of it
that goes with every object and we're
not gonna say what that is I mean it
might have to do with garbage collection
or who really knows but it's just
something that every object has right
you can just imagine it's some secret
information scrawled on top of it
scrawled on top of every object you
can't access so if we just add these up
then it's just 160 so not a lot of depth
there
so that's wrapper types and the glorious
world of boxing and unboxing